 Robert Lee Schooley Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Robert Lee Schooley Head of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Interim Department Head W-503 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-2729 schooley@illinois.edu Professor and Interim Department Head W-503 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-2729 schooley@illinois.edu Administrative Titles Head of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Primary Research Area Applied Animal Ecology and Conservation Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Schooley investigates how wildlife species and communities respond to human land-uses in a rapidly changing world. He investigates the effects of habitat fragmentation and landscape connectivity on mammals and applies insights to effective conservation. He also assesses the outcomes of large-scale restoration projects intended to benefit biodiversity. Education Ph.D., Ecology, Colorado State University, 2002 M.S., Wildlife Management, University of Maine, 1990 B.S., Wildlife Science, Pennsylvania State University, 1986 Biography Faculty member since 2005 Research Interests My research program integrates landscape ecology, wildlife conservation, and ecological restoration toward a goal of advancing knowledge that can be applied to the maintenance and recovery of biodiversity and ecosystem services in a rapidly changing world. I focus on understanding the effects of environmental patchiness and human land-use on species and communities and using this knowledge to promote sustainable ecosystems. My lab combines experimental and correlative field studies with statistical modeling and spatial analysis. Although my main expertise is with mammals, I welcome graduate students and other collaborators with different taxonomic preferences. My experience extends across many types of ecosystems from sub-tropical wetlands to North American deserts. However, I generally work in ecosystems with substantial anthropogenic influences and devise research that produces outcomes to inform habitat management by natural resource agencies. Affiliations Faculty Affiliate. Program in Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation Biology, University of Illinois. Faculty Affiliate. Illinois Natural History Survey, Prairie Research Institute, University of Illinois. Co-PI. Jornada Basin LTER Program. Las Cruces, New Mexico. For more information Google Scholar profile Documents Curriculum vitae Resident Instruction NRES 407 - Wildlife Population Ecology IB 462/NRES 442 - Mammalogy NRES 285 WFT - Wildlife Field Techniques NRES 285 CWC - Wildlife Conservation and Communities in Botswana Research Interests Habitat fragmentation, metapopulations, and landscape connectivity Landscape approaches to biodiversity restoration Ecology and conservation of arid ecosystems Urbanization and wildlife Professional Societies American Society of Mammalogists (Associate Editor, Journal of Mammalogy) International Association for Landscape Ecology Ecological Society of America The Wildlife Society 
 Yuji Arai Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Yuji Arai Associate Professor S-216 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-3602 yarai@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Soil Science & Conservation Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Arai employs a broad range of traditional and cutting-edge molecular scale approaches and tools at various temporal scales to better understand the complex chemical processes in soils and at the mineral-water interface. This understanding allows him to predict the biogeochemical fate/cycles of nutrients and contaminants and to assess the risk in the aquatic and terrestrial environment. Education Ph.D. (2002) Environmental Soil Chemistry. Univ. of Delaware B.S. (1996) Soil and Water Science (Major) and Environmental Toxicology (Minor). Univ. California, Davis Biography Research Interests Environmental Soil Chemistry, Molecular Environmental Science, Nanoscience, Toxicology, Biogeochemistry, Soil Science How I became interested in my field I have always been interested in the field of agro-environmental sciences including earth science, wildlife biology, toxicology, etc. During my undergraduate studies at UC Davis, I found my field (soil and water chemistry) through the environmental toxicology program.I was so fascinated by the translocation and transformation of toxicants in hydrosphere and pedosphere, and how they impact the human and ecosystem health. In my graduate study, I was able to advance knowledge in environmental soil chemistry and gained unique research skills in synchrotron based X-ray techniques. I have been active in disseminating my research findings to international audiences via publications and presentations at national meetings. My goal at UIUC is to develop a rewarding research and teaching career in molecular environmental science and soil chemistry. Professional affiliations: American Chemical Society, Soil Science Society of America, Clays and Clay Mineral Society, Association for Women in Soil Science Academic Interests/Expertise After my doctoral work at University of Delaware, I gained great research and/or educational experience at U.S. Geological Survey in CA and Clemson University in SC (Assistant-Associate Professor of Soil Chemistry) before coming to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. My major research interest in environmental soil/geo chemistry is to understand the predominant and fundamental chemical reactions and mechanisms of nutrients (e.g., Mo and P), metal(loid)s (e.g., As, Cr, and Cu) and radionuclides (e.g., U and Np) at the mineral-water interface, in soils/sediments. Such knowledge greatly enhances ones ability to understand the contaminant speciation and to predict the fate/transport and bioavailability in aquatic-terrestrial environments. I am especially interested in the partitioning (i.e., sorption, desorption, precipitation, and dissolution) and redox reactions that take place at the mineral-water interface. As with my previous research, I am employing a cadre of macroscopic and molecular scale approaches and tools over a range of temporal scales. For more information ResearchGate Google Scholar Arai Research Lab Resident Instruction NRES 201: Introduction to Soil Science NRES 351: Introduction to Environmental Chemistry NRES 487: Soil Chemistry Chapters in Books Arai, Y. 2009. Arsenic and Antimony. In Trace Elements in Soils, editor Hooda, Peter., Blackwell publisher, pp. 383-407. Arai, Y. 2016. Soil Chemistry. In Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1-37. Selected Articles in Journals Click the Arai Research lab link above to view my full publication record. Journal Editorships Associate Editor of Soil Science Society of America Journal Professional Societies American Chemical Society American Geophysical Union North American Colleges and Teachers of Agriculture The American Association for the Advancement of Science The Clay Minerals Society Teaching Honors 2017 North American Colleges and Teachers of Agriculture (NACTA) Educator Award (July, 2017) Research Honors Marion L. and Chrystie. M. Jackson Soil. Science Award (Nov, 2016) 
 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign Home | Publications and Bio | Laboratory | Prospective Students | Links Research Interests General: Basic and applied population, community, and evolutionary ecology; statistical ecology; disease ecology. Current Specific Areas: Effects of ecological disturbance on conservation of avian populations and communities; comparative demography of temperate and tropical birds; evolution of life history traits - especially dispersal and clutch size; temporal variation and historical effects on community structure; demography and conservation of small populations; ecology of edges; ecology of urbanization. Jeffrey Brawn Professor and Stuart L. and Nancy J. Levenick Chair in Sustainability Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences W-523 Turner Hall 1102 South Goodwin Avenue Urbana, IL 61801 Phone: (217) 244-5937 jbrawn@illinois.edu Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences College of Agriculture, Consumer, and Environmental Sciences University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
 Richard J Brazee Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Richard J Brazee Associate Professor W-523 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 333-6271 brazee@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Human Dimensions of the Environment Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Brazees research mathematically models the optimal use of natural resources, including forests, land, and fishery stocks over time. His research provides extensive foundations for other scholars research efforts, is adopted by financial institutions to evaluate long-term projects, and serves as a basis for public policy and management debates. Education A.B., Economics & Mathematics, University of Michigan, 1979 Fulbright-Hayes Fellow, Econometrics and Operations Research, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, 1979-80 Ph.D., University of Michigan, 1987 A.M., Mathematics, University of Michigan, 1983 A.M., Economics, University of Michigan, 1987 A.M., University of Michigan, 1987 Ph.D., Natural Resource Economics, University of Michigan, 1987 Biography Faculty member since 1991 How I got interested in this field Since I was in high school I have been interested in how society uses natural resources. These interests led me to first study economics, which focuses on how scarce resources are allocated, and then to study mathematics to be able to rigorously model resource allocation decisions over time. While I was in graduate school, I became fascinated with forests, and how we use forests. More recently, I have also become interested in the economic survival of small rural communities near natural resources such as rivers, lakes or forests. Research Interests My research focuses on developing dynamic models for two relatively distinct areas. Historically, my research has focused analyzing forestry policy and management issues. More recently, part of my research has focused on modeling the economic health of rural communities. Academic Positions Associate Professor in the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Other Professional Activities I am a member of the interdepartmental program in Environmental and Natural Resource Economics . Resident Instruction NRES 510 NRES 410 Research Statement Development of economic models applicable to forestry and natural resource policy issues. Research Interests Environmental and natural resource economics Professional Societies Society of American Foresters Fulbright Alumni Association American Economics Association 
 Home People Projects Publications Courses Opportunities Links Contact News About our lab Welcome to the homepage of the Fraterrigo lab group at the University of Illinois in the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences. Our research emphasizes how processes and interactions at fine spatial scales contribute to emergent processes and properties at broad spatial scales within the context of two main questions: 1. How do vegetation patterns respond to environmental change and disturbance? 2. How do these changes affect ecosystem function, especially the retention and storage of nutrients and carbon in plants and soils? We use both experimental and observational approaches and a variety of tools to integrate fine- and coarse-grained perspectives of ecosystems and how they function: from laboratory assays that provide insights into the activities of soil microorganisms to computer simulation models that predict dynamics at watershed and landscape scales. We work in the midwestern and eastern US, and in Southwest and Arctic Alaska. We have two overarching goals. First, to provide the mechanistic understanding needed to predict how ecosystems, and the services that they supply, will respond to future environmental change. Second, to use this information to support decision-making that enhances ecosystem resilience. Copyright2008 landscape.nres.illinois.edu. 
 Kaiyu Guan Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Kaiyu Guan Assistant Professor S-218 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 300-2690 kaiyug@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Global Environmental Change Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Guan provides solutions for real-life problems, such as large-scale crop monitoring and forecasting, water management and sustainability, and global food security. He uses satellite data, computational models, field work, and machine learning approaches to address how climate and human practices affect crop productivity, water resource availability, and ecosystem functioning. Education PhD, Environmental Engineering, Princeton University, 2013 B.S. Geography, Geoinformatics, Nanjing University, 2008 Biography I am an Assistant Professor in the Department of Natural Resources and Environmenal Sciences at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign . I am also a Blue Waters Professor with a joint appointment with the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) . I am a computational environmental scientist studying underlying processes of vegetation-hydrology interactions (i.e. ecohydrology, water-ecosystem-food nexus) for natural and agricultural ecosystems. My current research has a particular emphasis on the impacts of hydro-climate change on vegetation dynamics and crop productivity in tropical and temperate regions.The goal of my research is to increase our societys resilience and adaptability to maintain sustainability of ecosystem services, food security and water resources under the influence of climate change and anthropogenic drivers (e.g. land use change, increased population and food demands), which directly or indirectly impacts the livelihood and wellbeing of billions of humans. More information can be found at: http://faculty.nres.illinois.edu/~kaiyuguan/ . I have plans to recruit graduate students and postdocs with full supports in the coming years in the area of"crop remote sensing and modeling." Thus, if you are interested in these opportunities, please contact me with your CV. Academic Positions Postdoctoral scholar, Stanford University, 2013-2015 For more information Other Professional Employment Research Scientist, Climate Corp, 2015 Research Interests Ecohydrology, Crop Remote Sensing, Crop Modeling and Forecasting, Agriculture Adaptation to Climate Change, Vegetation Dynamic Modeling, Terrestrial Remote Sensing (optical/microwave), Biogeography, Drought, Vegetation Phenology, Tropical Ecology, GIS Selected Articles in Journals Guan, K., Lobell, D.B., Berry, J., Joiner, J., Guanter, L., Zhang, Y., and Badgley, G. (2015) "Improving the mointoring of crop productivity using spaceborne solar-induced fluorescence", Global Change Biology. Guan, K., Sultan, B., M., Biasutti, M., Lobell, D.B. (2015) What aspects of future rainfall changes matter for crop yields in West Africa, Geophysical Research Letters. Shukla, S., Safeeq, M., AghaKouchak, A., Guan, K., and Funk, C. (2015) Temperature impacts on the Water Year 2014 Drought in California, Geophysical Research Letters. Guan, K., Pan, M., Li, H., Wolf, A., Wu, J., Medvigy, D., Caylor, K. K., Sheffield J., Wood, E.F., Malhi, Y., Liang, M., Kimball, J. S., Saleska, S., Berry, J., Joiner, J., and Lyapustin, A. I. (2015) "Photosynthetic seasonality of global tropical forests constrained by hydroclimate", Nature Geoscience. Sultan, B., Guan, K., Kouressy, M., Biasutti, M., Piani, C., Hammer, G.L., Mclean, G., and Lobell, D.B. (2014) "Robust features of future climate change impacts on sorghum yields in West Africa", Environmental Research Letters, 9(10). Reid, M.C, Guan, K., Fabian Wagner, Mauzerall, D.L. (2014) "Global Methane Emission from Pit Latrines", Environmental Science and Technology, 48,8727-8734. Guan, K., Wood, E. F., Caylor, K. K., Medvigy, D., Sheffield, J., Pan, M., Kimball, J., Xu, X and Jones, M.O. (2014) "Terrestrial hydrological control on vegetation phenology of African savannas and woodlands", Journal of Geophysical Research-Biogeosciences, 119(8), 8727-8734. Good, S.P., Soderberg, K., Guan, K., King, E. G., Scanlon, T., Caylor, K.K. (2014) "2H Isotopic flux partitioning of evapotranspiration over a grass field following a water pulse and subsequent dry down", Water Resources Research, 50(2), 1410-1432. Sheffield, J., Wood, E. F., Chaney, N., Guan, K., Safri, S., Yuan, X., Olang, L., Amani, A., Ali, A., and Demuth, S. (2014), "A drought monitoring and forecarsting system for Sub-Sahara African water resources and food security", Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 95(6), 2014. Yuan, X., Wood, E. F., Chaney, N. W., Sheffield J., Kam, J., Liang, M., and Guan, K. (2014), "Probalistic Seasonal Forecasting of African Drought by Dynamical Models", Journal of Hydrometeorology, 14, 1706-1720. Guan, K., Medvigy, D., Wood, E. F. , Caylor, K. K. ,Li, S. and Jeong S.J. (2014) "Deriving vegetation phenological time and trajectory information over Africa using SEVIRI daily LAI", IEEE transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 53(2),1113-1130. Guan, K., Wolf, A., Wood, E. F., Medvigy, D., Caylor, K. K. and Pan, M. (2013) "Seasonal coupling of canopy function and structure in African tropical forests and its environmental controls", Ecosphere, 4(3). Guan, K., Wood, E. F. and Caylor, K. K. (2012) "Multi-sensor derivation of regional vegetation fractional cover in Africa", Remote Sensing of Environment, 124, 653-665. Guan, K., Thompson, S.E., Harman, C. J., Basu, N. B., Rao, S. P., Sivapalan, M., Kalita, P.K. and Packman, A. I. (2011) "Spatio-temporal scaling of hydrological and agro-chemical export dynamics in a tile-drained Midwestern watershed", Water Resource Research, 47, W00J02. Journal Editorships Guest editor for Special Issue: Climate extremes and biogeochemical cycles in the terrestrial biosphere: impacts and feedbacks across scale in Biogeosciences Professional Societies American Geophysical Union (AGU) American Meteorological Society (AMS) Ecological Society of America (ESA) European Geophysical Union (EGU) 
 Robert J M Hudson Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Robert J M Hudson Associate Professor S-212 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 333-7641 rjhudson@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Soil Science & Conservation Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Hudsons research helps advance methods for more accurately simulating soil carbon dynamics and the reactivity of trace metals in natural waters. His group developed a novel technique for measuring methylmercury that has been applied to quantify mercury pollution in muscle tissues of wildlife, waters of wetlands, rivers, and denitrifying bioreactors, and sediments of wetlands and coastal oceans. Biography Research Interests Aquatic chemistry and biogeochemistry Curriculum Vitae (PDF) Description of Research Modeling biogeochemical process dynamics, including fate and transport of metals in the environment, trace metal-phytoplankton interactions, and global cycles of carbon and mercury; Modeling environmental reaction kinetics and solution thermodynamics Resident Instruction Biogeochemistry of Watershed-Aquatic System Interactions NRES 490 - Surface Water System Chemistry Professional Societies American Chemical Society American Society for Limnology and Oceanography American Geophysical Union 
 McKenzie Frances Johnson Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences McKenzie Frances Johnson Assistant Professor S-512 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 300-8308 mfj4@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Human Dimensions of the Environment Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Education Ph.D. Environmental Policy, Duke University, 2017 M.A. Conservation Biology, Columbia University, 2007 A.B. Environmental Studies, Vassar College, 2004 Biography My research and teaching focuses on global environmental politics, environmental justice, and human security. I am particularly interested in understanding whether and how global environmental governance initiatives create local opportunities to enhance social justice and environmental sustainability. My research program is global in scope: I have conducted interdisciplinary fieldwork in South Asia, Africa, and South America. However, my next major project will focus on the intersection of environmental justice and energy policy in the United States, with a specific focus on the ability of Environmental Impact Assessments to provide just outcomes for communities impacted by pipeline development. For more information Google Scholar Profile Johnson Lab for Research on Environmental Inequality Research Gate Profile Documents M. Johnson_CV_2018 Research Interests Global Environmental Politics Environmental Justice Environmental Security and Peacebuilding Biodiversity Conservation Selected Articles in Journals Johnson, M.F., K. Karanth, and E. Weinthal. 2018.Compensation as a Policy for Mitigating Human-Wildlife Conflict Around Four Protected Areas in Rajasthan, India. Conservation & Society 16(3): 305-319. Johnson, M.F. 2017. Institutional Change in a Conflict Setting: Afghanistans Environment Law. European Journal of International Relations, 23(1): 168-191. Johnson, M.F., C. Hannah, L. Acton, R. Popovici, K.K. Karanth, E. Weinthal. 2014. Network Environmentalism: Citizen Scientists as Agents for Environmental Advocacy. Global Environmental Change, 29: 235-245. Johnson, M.F., N. Kanderian, C. Shank, H. Rahmani, D. Lawson and P. Smallwood. 2012. Setting Priorities for Protected Area Planning in a Conflict Zone Afghanistans National Protected Area System Plan. Biological Conservation, 148(1): 146-155. 
 Angela D Kent Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Angela D Kent Professor S-510 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 333-4216 akent@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Microbial Communities and Functions Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Kent studies microbial communities that help sustain healthy ecosystems. Her work predicts impacts of global change and other human forces on the functions of microbial ecosystems, and enhances environmental quality by harnessing microbial processes. Education B.A., Biology, Grinnell College, 1992 M.S., Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1996 Ph.D., Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2000 Biography Research Interests Microbial ecology, environmental microbiology How I became interested in my field I have been interested in many areas of science since I was young, but I managed to narrow down my broad interests to microbiology and genetics as an undergraduate. My training in microbial genetics as a graduate student prepared me for studying microbes in many different settings. I have always been interested in working on projects that can be applied somehow to improve environmental management, animal health, or plant productivity as a result, my research explores microbes in a number of different ecological settings. I am fascinated by the number of ways that microbes influence the world around us, and seek to share my enthusiasm through my teaching and research activities. Academic Interests/Expertise Microbial ecology and environmental microbiology: Microbial populations are a key component of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and are responsible for mediating a number of important processes, including nutrient cycling and biogeochemical transformations. Molecular biology tools allow us to describe the diversity and structure of microbial communities in natural systems, and relate these to environmental drivers and ecosystem function. I am interested in studying the ecology of the microbial communities in order to ultimately improve our ability to predict the impact of anthropogenic influences on processes mediated by microbial communities. I am also interested in applying our understanding of microbial ecology to improve the health and sustainability of natural and managed ecosystems. For more information Kent Laboratory Google Scholar profile Documents Curriculum Vitae (PDF) Resident Instruction NRES 475 - Environmental Microbiology NRES 500 - Seminar NRES 100 - Fundamentals of Environmental Science Professional Societies Ecological Society of America International Society for Microbial Ecology American Society for Microbiology American Society of Limnology and Oceanography 
 Frances E Kuo Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Frances E Kuo Associate Professor 289 National Soybean Res Ctr 1101 West Peabody Drive Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-0393 fekuo@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Human Dimensions of the Environment Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Kuos work helps cities provide a healthy human habitat for their residents by showing the benefits of urban greening. Her research shows that urban greening reduces aggression and crime in inner cities, reduces ADHD symptoms in communities of all sizes, promotes self-discipline and academic achievement in children, and promotes health across the lifespan by boosting the human immune system. She also defines sustainable landscape practices for all federal lands in the United States and internationally. Education B.S., University of Michigan, 1984 M.A., University of California-Berkeley, 1989 Ph.D., University of Michigan,1995 Biography Faculty member since 1998 How I got interested in this field I have always been interested in how physical environments affect people -- as a kid, I was interested in the relationship between architecture and psychology. In college, when I discovered that there actually was such a thing as environmental psychology, it was like Dante meeting Beatrice. Since then, it's really been the findings that have led me to focus on natural environments and their impacts on people. It is exciting to study an aspect of the environment that is generally neglected, but which turns out to have such important and pervasive impacts. Research Interests My lab, the Landscape and Human Health Lab, focuses on the connection between natural features (trees, grass, flowers, and green space) and outcomes related to healthy human functioning, such as crime and violence; strength of community; well-being and coping; exercise and vitality; and attention, executive-functions, self-control, and learning. In addition to directing the Landscape and Human Health Lab, I also am a panelist and contributing author for the Blue Ribbon Green Infrastructure Panel, convened by Casey Trees Foundation, National Capital Planning Commission, and the Department of City Planning, Washington D.C.; a consultant to the City of Chicago on their Green Urban Design Initiative, an expert panelist for the Robert Wood Johnson Active Living Research National Advisory Council, a research affiliate at the Centre on Aging at The University of Manitoba, and serve on the editorial board of the Journal of Architecture and Planning Research. I am a reviewer for the Journal of Environmental Psychology; Children, Youth and Environment; Environment & Behavior; Journal of Environmental Psychology; Journal of Leisure Research; Urban Geography; Horticultural Technology; Psychology and Health; and Psych Reports Resident Instruction NRES 472 - Environmental Psychology 
Search this site Eric R. Larson Lab home People Publications Opportunities Eric R. Larson Lab home People Publications Opportunities More home People Publications Opportunities Eric R. Larson Lab I am an assistant professor in Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign ( link ). My research focuses on freshwater species, communities, and ecosystems. I am particularly interested in preventing and managing species invasions , anticipating and adapting to the consequences of climate change , and understanding how habitat structure and land use change affects ecological processes. I also work with practitioners to evaluate conservation effectiveness from both economic and ecological perspectives. I have a taxonomic specialization in freshwater crayfish , but am broadly interested in the above research areas regardless of study system. For more information, contact me ( link ) or view my full CV as a PDF ( link ). Google Sites Report abuse
 Jeffrey W. Matthews Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Jeffrey W. Matthews Associate Professor S-516 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-2168 jmatthew@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Restoration Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Matthews contributes to the conservation and restoration of wetland ecosystems. He conducts field research on the ecology of freshwater wetlands, ecological restoration, and ecosystem services. He also studies U.S. and international environmental policies that affect wetlands. Education Ph.D., Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences, 2008 M.A., Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Indiana University, 1999 B.A., Botany, Miami University, 1997 B.A. Zoology, Miami University, 1997 B.S. Zoology, Miami University, 1997 Biography Faculty member since 2012 For more information Matthews Laboratory Google Scholar profile Resident Instruction NRES 500 - Graduate Seminar NRES 415 - Native Plant ID and Floristics NRES 418 - Wetland Ecology and Management NRES 512 - Discussions in Restoration Ecology NRES 285 - Field Experience: Wetland Delineation and Classification NRES 419 - Environment and Plant Ecosystems Research Statement My primary research interests are restoration ecology, wetland mitigation policy and applied plant ecology. Ecological restoration is increasingly employed as an environmental strategy for reversing biodiversity loss and improving human well-being by enhancing the provisioning of ecosystem services. However, restoration outcomes have been difficult to predict and restorations often fail to meet expected goals. I seek to understand the drivers of change in ecological communities and apply that understanding to challenges in restoration and conservation. I employ a combination of simulation models, field experiments and direct observation of plant communities in natural and restored habitatsfrequently wetlands but also prairies and upland forests. Current research themes include the effects of landscape context on restoration outcomes, the impacts of flood disturbance on wetland plant communities, the distribution and impact of invasive plants, and the evaluation of the effectiveness of compensatory wetland mitigation policies. Research Interests restoration ecology wetland ecology wetland mitigation policy applied community ecology ecological assessment invasive species Selected Articles in Journals Blake-Bradshaw, A.G., J.D. Lancaster, J.R. OConnell, J.W. Matthews, M.W. Eichholz and H.M. Hagy. 2020. Suitability of wetlands for migrating and breeding waterbirds in Illinois. Wetlands, in press. Price, E.P.F., G. Spyreas and J.W. Matthews. 2020. Biotic homogenization in the conterminous United States driven by Phalaris arundinacea and anthropogenic disturbance. Landscape Ecology, in press. Matthews, J.W., S. McIntyre, A.L. Peralta and C. Rodgers. 2020. Long-term assessment of alternative strategies for the restoration of floodplain forest in the presence of an invasive grass, Phalaris arundinacea. Wetlands, in press. Sonter, L.J., M. Barnes, J.W. Matthews and M. Maron. 2019. Quantifying habitat losses and gains made by US Species Conservation Banks to improve compensation policies and avoid perverse outcomes. Conservation Letters 12:e12629. Price, E.P.F., G. Spyreas and J.W. Matthews. 2019. Wetland compensation and its impacts on beta-diversity. Ecological Applications 29: e01827. Skultety, D. and J.W. Matthews. 2018. Human land use as a driver of plant community composition in wetlands of the Chicago metropolitan region. Urban Ecosystems 21: 447-458. Price, E.P.F., G. Spyreas and J.W. Matthews. 2018. Biotic homogenization of regional wetland plant communities within short timescales in the presence of an aggressive invader. Journal of Ecology 106: 1180-1190. Skultety, D. and J.W. Matthews. 2017. Urbanization and roads drive non-native plant invasion in the Chicago Metropolitan region. Biological Invasions 19: 2553-2566. Matthews, J.W., B. Molano-Flores, J. Ellis, P.B. Marcum, W. Handel, J. Zylka and L.R. Phillippe. 2017. Impacts of management and antecedent site condition on restoration outcomes in a sand prairie. Restoration Ecology 25: 972-981. Brudvig, L.A., R.S. Barak, J.T. Bauer, T.T. Caughlin, D.C. Laughlin, L. Larios, J.W. Matthews, K.L. Stuble, N.E. Turley and C.R. Zirbel. 2017. Interpreting variation to advance predictive restoration science. Journal of Applied Ecology 54: 1018-1027. Van den Bosch, K. and J.W. Matthews. 2017. An assessment of long-term compliance with performance standards in compensatory mitigation wetlands. Environmental Management 59: 546-556. Journal Editorships Associate Editor, Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment Professional Societies Society for Ecological Restoration Society of Wetland Scientists Ecological Society of America Honors North American Colleges and Teachers of Agriculture Educator Award (2018) 
 Kevin McSweeney Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Kevin McSweeney Clinical Professor S-210 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 mcsween@illinois.edu Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. McSweeney focuses on reclamation of disturbed land. He is improving handling and transport of soil material and use of specially selected plants to reduce soil compaction. Research is conducted in Illinois and China on active and abandoned mine sites and has application to other disturbed lands in rural, industrial, and urban areas. 
 Daniel Charles Miller Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Daniel Charles Miller Associate Professor S-406 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-8293 dcmiller@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Human Dimensions of the Environment Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Miller identifies solutions to one of the most pressing challenges of our time: conserving the earths rich biological diversity while enhancing the well-being of some of the worlds poorest people. He focuses on understanding the effectiveness of funding for conservation and development programs around the world, especially relating to forests in tropical countries. His findings inform policy, funding decisions, and new research directions. Education Ph.D. Natural Resources and Environment, University of Michigan, 2013 M.A. Political Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1999 B.A. Political Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1997 Biography My research and teaching focus on environmental politics and policy. I am especially interested in understanding the conservation and development impacts of international aid in tropical countries and the political factors that shape those impacts. I work in a variety of settings around the world, but have a strong geographic interest in Africa and on forests more generally. Prior to joining the NRES Faculty in 2015, I was Senior Forestry Specialist at the Program on Forests at the World Bank. Before that I was Program Associate for Conservation and Sustainable Development at the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and Rural Community Development Advisor for Yayasan Dian Tama, a local NGO in West Kalimanatan, Indonesia. I have held leadership positions on the Board of the Society for Conservation Biologys Social Science Working Group and currently serve on the Editorial Board for Conservation Letters. For more information Google Scholar Profile ResearchGate Profile Twitter Profile Miller Research Group Website Documents Miller CV Research Interests Environmental politics and policy Biodiversity conservation International development Forestry and wildlife Selected Articles in Journals Miller, D.C. and Katia S. Nakamura. 2018. "Protected areas and the sustainable governance of forest resources." Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 32:96-103. Waldron, A., D.C. Miller, D. Redding, A.O. Mooers, T.S. Kuhn, N. Nibbelink, J.T. Roberts, J. Tobias, and J.L. Gittleman. 2017. Reductions in global biodiversity loss predicted from conservation spending. Nature. Miller, D.C., C.B. Wahln, and P. Rana. 2017. A Crystal Ball for Forests? Analyzing the Social-Ecological Impacts of Forest Conservation and Management over the Long Term. Environment and Society: Advances in Research. 8: 40-62. Miller, D.C., J.C. Munoz-Mora, and L. Christiaensen. 2017. "The Prevalence, Economic Contribution, and Determinants of Trees on Farms across Sub-Saharan Africa." Forest Policy and Economics. 84: 47-61. Newton, P., D.C. Miller, M.A. Ateenyi Byenkya, and A. Agrawal. 2016. Who are forest-dependent people? A taxonomy to aid livelihood and land use decision-making in forested regions. Land Use Policy. 57: 388-395. McKinnon, M.C., S.H. Cheng, R. Garside, Y.J. Masuda, D.C. Miller. 2015. "Sustainability: Map the evidence." Nature 528: 185-187. Miller, D. C., M. Minn, and B. Sinsin. 2015. "The Importance of National Political Context to the Impacts of International Conservation Aid: Evidence from the W National Parks of Benin and Niger." Environmental Research Letters 10(11): 115001. Bare, M., C. Kauffman, and D.C. Miller. 2015. "Assessing the Impact of International Conservation Aid on Deforestation in Sub-Saharan Africa." Environmental Research Letters 10(12): 125010. Miller, D.C. 2014 Explaining Global Patterns of Aid for Linked Biodiversity Conservation and Development. World Development 59: 341-359. Waldron, A., A.O. Mooers, D.C. Miller, N. Nibbelink, D. Redding, T.S. Kuhn, J.T. Roberts, and J.L. Gittleman. 2013. Targeting Global Conservation Funding to Limit Immediate Biodiversity Declines. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 110(29): 12144-12148. 
 James Robert Miller Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences James Robert Miller Professor N-407 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-3896 jrmillr@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Applied Animal Ecology and Conservation Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Miller is advancing our understanding of strategies for conserving biodiversity in working landscapes, comprising both private agricultural holdings and protected areas. He collaborates with social and natural scientists at several universities, as well as land managers in the private and public sectors to address this crucial issue. Education B.S., Wildlife Biology, Colorado State University, 1991 M.S., Wildlife Biology, Colorado State University, 1994 Ph.D., Ecology, Colorado State University, 1999 Biography Research Interests My research focuses on providing a scientific basis for reconciling human land use and the conservation of native species. Although most of my investigations fall under the rubric of avian ecology, I have also mentored graduate students studying other taxa when the questions fall within my general interests. Typically, my research is conducted over relatively broad spatial scales and relies on a combination of field work and the use of GIS and remote sensing tools. The context for my studies varies considerably, ranging from forested and agricultural landscapes to suburban and urban environments. I tend to involve natural resource professionals in the conceptualization and design of my projects, as they will frequently be the end-users of information derived from the research. These individuals include land managers from state or federal agencies, as well as personnel from non-governmental organizations. I also often work collaboratively with other ecologists, modelers, or social scientists in order to provide a richer perspective on a given study system. Curriculum Vitae (PDF) For more information Miller Lab Professional Societies Society for Conservation Biology International Association for Landscape Ecology Ecological Society of America Associate Editor, Restoration Ecology 
 Richard L Mulvaney Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Richard L Mulvaney Professor S-220 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 333-9467 mulvaney@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Soil Science & Conservation Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Mulvaney focuses on increasing nitrogen fertilizer uptake in crops, with the goal of increasing profits while reducing negative environmental impacts of excessive nitrogen inputs. This has led to partnerships with the private sector that are directed toward improving application techniques and exploiting the potential of the Illinois Soil Nitrogen Test for site-specific nitrogen management. Biography Research Interests My teaching and research relates to soil fertility, with particular emphasis on the fate and behavior of soil and fertilizer nitrogen. Partial funding is generated through an analysis service for N-15 using an automated mass spectrometer. Current research topics include the development and evaluation of a simple soil test for amino sugarsas a means to detect field sites that do not need nitrogen fertilization, chemical nature and dynamics of soil amino sugars, relationship of soil amino sugar content and composition to manure application, and the microbial basis for rapid nitrification of urea nitrogen applied to soil. Academic Interests/Expertise My teaching and research relates to soil fertility, with particular emphasis on the fate and behavior of soil and fertilizer nitrogen; partial funding for this work is generated through an analysis service for N-15 using an automated mass spectrometer in my laboratory; current research topics include the effects of nitrogen fertilizers on denitrification, microbial transformations of nitrogen-containing pesticides, and the development of simple diffusion methods of determining nitrogen in soils, plant materials, and water samples. Other Activities Editor, Soil Science Society of America Journal Documents Curriculum Vitae Resident Instruction NRES 572 - Chemistry of Soil Fertility NRES 488 - Soil Fertility and Fertilizers Professional Societies International Society of Soil Science Soil Science Society of America American Society of Agronomy 
 Joy O'Keefe Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Joy O'Keefe Assistant Professor N-409 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 300-6933 jmokeefe@illinois.edu Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Joy O'Keefes' research primarily focuses on ways to facilitate the coexistence of bats and humans in human-altered landscapes. She works to understand the roosting and foraging ecology of bats, identify best practices for studying bat ecology, characterize bat behaviors, and assess the quality of mitigation practices designed to help bats. Dr. O'Keefe collaborates with many organizations and people who interact with bats, including private landowners, USDA Forest Service, National Park Service, and state agencies. Education B.S., Zoology, North Carolina State University, 1997 M.S., Biology, Eastern Kentucky University, 2004 Ph.D., Wildlife and Fisheries Biology, Clemson University, 2009 Biography I joined the faculty at the University of Illinois in 2020 after serving as an Assistant and Associate Professor of Biology at Indiana State University from 2011-2020. From 2012-2020, I was the Director of the Center for Bat Research, Outreach, and Conservation. How I got interested in this field Growing up in suburbia, I interacted with harmless critters in my backyard, such as easily captured earth snakes, and rescued songbirds and voles maimed by our outdoor cats. I first aimed for a career as a veterinarian, though I really longed to aid in conserving wildlife in far flung places. I`d almost completed my undergraduate degree in Zoology when I was exposed to the possibility of a career in ecology or wildlife biology. Cataloguing animal behaviors during internships at the NC Zoo and the Duke Primate Center motivated me to pursue research and my MS degree. Later, as a biologist and environmental educator for a rural utility company, I conducted surveys for federally endangered Indiana bats to evaluate the potential effects of proposed utility projects. This illuminating experience led me to my doctoral research on the ecology of forest-dwelling bats. I remain motivated to study bats because populations of these fascinating and unique mammals are in peril not only in North America, but worldwide, due to habitat loss, disease, climate change, and human persecution, among other threats. Documents Curriculum Vitae Research Interests Distribution and population status of imperiled bats Human-wildlife interactions in urban areas Bats in anthropogenic structures Ecosystem services of forest-dwelling bats Wildlife health and ecology in managed forests Professional Societies Southeastern Bat Diversity Network North American Society for Bat Research Midwest Bat Working Group American Society of Mammalogists 
 Dr. Cory Suski Ecological Physiology Home | Contact Home Research Publications Lab Members Teaching Contact I am a Professor in the Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign . The research in my lab can be defined as 'ecological physiology' as I combine laboratory and field studies to determine the ecological and physiological mechanisms that control abundance and distribution in freshwater aquatic organisms. While my research is grounded in basic biology, many of my projects work to generate novel conservation strategies to protect freshwater ecosystems. Freshwater fishes are an ideal model system for this research because their diversity and abundance provides me with opportunity to examine these issues while considering evolutionary and trophic relationships. Last Updated: April 17, 2020 
Search this site Carmen M. Ugarte Carmen M. Ugarte Research Assistant Professor University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Research: My research focuses on understanding the effects of soil management practices on soil quality and function. I am especially interested in studying the dynamics of soil food webs and their influence on soil ecosystem services such as nutrient cycling, carbon storage, and the regulation of population densities of deleterious soil organisms. Our ability to gain insight on these relationships and processes is fundamental to improving soil management and ensuring sustainability of our natural resources. My work includes basic and applied research at different scales (e.g., experimental and replicated trials, on-farm research) at the regional and national levels in agronomic and natural systems. Contact: email: cugarte(at)illinois.edu mail: 1102 S. Goodwin Ave., MC-047, Urbana, IL 61801 Education: Ph.D. in Natural Resources & Environmental Sciences (Soil Biology & Ecology), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL M.S. in Natural Resources & Environmental Sciences (Soil Ecology), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL B.S. in Agricultural Engineering, Zamorano-Panamerican School of Agriculture, Honduras Selected Publications: Xia, Y., C.M. Ugarte, K. Guan, M. Pentrak, and M.M. Wander. 2018. Developing Near- and Mid-Infrared spectroscopy analysis methods for rapid assessment of soil quality in Illinois. Soil Science Society of America Journal. doi:10.2136/sssaj2018.05.0175 Ugarte, C.M. , H. Kwon, and M.M. Wander. 2018. Conservation management and ecosystem services in midwestern United States agricultural systems. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation. doi:10.2489/jswc.73.4.422 Kwon, H., C.M. Ugarte, S.M. Ogle, S.A. Williams, and M.M. Wander. 2017. Use of inverse modeling to evaluate CENTURY-predictions for soil carbon sequestration in US rain-fed corn production systems. PLOS ONE. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172861 Hurisso, T.T., S.W. Culman, W.R. Horwath, J. Wade, D. Cass, J.W. Beniston, T.M. Bowles, A.S. Grandy, A.J. Franzluebbers, M.E. Schipanski, S. Lucas, and C.M. Ugarte . 2016. Comparison of permanganate oxidizable C and mineralizable C for assessment of organic matter stabilization and mineralization. Soil Science Society of America Journal. doi: 10.2136/sssaj2016.04.0106 Marzano, S.Y., M.M. Wander, M.B. Villamil, C.M. Ugarte , and D. Eastburn. 2015. Organic transition effects on soilborne diseases of soybean and populations of Pseudomonadaceae. Agronomy Journal. do:10.2134/agronj14.0318 Ugarte, C.M. , H. Kwon, S.S. Andrews, and M.M. Wander. 2014. A meta-analysis of soil organic matter response to soil management practices: An approach to evaluate conservation indicators. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation. doi:10.2489/jswc.69.5.422 Marzano, S.Y., M.M. Wander, M.B. Villamil, C.M. Ugarte , E.R. Zaborski, and D. Eastburn. 2014. Transitional cropping systems and organic amendment effects on crop diseases. Agronomy Journal. doi:10.2134/agronj2013.0189 Ugarte, C.M. , E.R. Zaborski, and M.M. Wander. 2013. Nematode indicators as integrative measures of soil condition in organic cropping systems. Soil Biology and Biochemistry. doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2013.03.035 Ugarte, C.M. and M.M. Wander. 2013. The influence of organic transition strategy on chemical and biological soil tests. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems. doi:10.1017/S1742170511000573 Ugarte, C.M. and E. Zaborski. 2009. Soil nematodes in organic farming systems. The eXtension Foundation. Available online at: http://www.extension.org/article/24726 Google Sites Report abuse
 Carena J van Riper Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Carena J van Riper Associate Professor S-524 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-9317 cvanripe@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Human Dimensions of the Environment Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Carena van Riper, Ph.D., is an interdisciplinary social scientist within the human dimensions of natural resources concentration in NRES. Research in her lab is focused on increasing scientific understanding of human behavior related to the sustainability of social-ecological systems. van Riper and her students investigate multiple drivers of behavior, particularly social psychological mechanisms that shape how and why people make decisions about the environment. She works closely with stakeholders to explore factors that enable and constrain adaptations to impacts such as invasive species, climate change, and human-wildlife conflict. Although her research is guided by mixed methods, she specializes in quantitative techniques for incorporating stakeholder viewpoints into management decisions and policy outcomes. Education B.A. Interdisciplinary Studies (conservation biology and outdoor recreation), Arizona State University, 2007 M.S. Natural Resources (protected area management), University of Vermont, 2009 Ph.D. Human Dimensions of Natural Resources Laboratory and Applied Biodiversity Sciences NSF-IGERT Program, Texas A&M University, 2014 For more information van Riper Lab Google Scholar Profile Research Gate Profile Twitter Profile Research Interests Conservation psychology Environmental behavior Park and protected area management Cultural ecosystem services Selected Articles in Journals Raymond, C.M., Kenter, J.K., van Riper, C.J., Rawluk, A., & Kendal, D. (2019). Editorial overview: Theoretical traditions in social values for sustainability. Sustainability Science, 14(5), 1173-1185. Steger, C., Hirsch, S., Evers, C., Branoff, B., Petrova, M., Nielson-Pincus, M., Wardropper, C., & van Riper, C.J. (2018). Ecosystem services as boundary objects for transdisciplinary collaboration. Ecological Economics, 143, 153-160. Muhar, A., Raymond, C., van den Born, R., Bauer, N., Bck, K., Braito, M., Buijs, A., Flint, C., de Groot, W.T., Ives, C.D., Mitrofanenko, T., Plieninger, T., Tucker, C. & van Riper, C.J. (2018). A model integrating social-cultural concepts of nature into frameworks of interaction between social and natural systems. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management., 61(5-6), 756-777. van Riper, C.J., Browning, M., Becker, D., Stewart, W., Suski, C., Browning, L., & Golebie, E. (2019). Human-nature relationships and normative beliefs predict behaviors that reduce the spread of aquatic invasive species. Environmental Management, 63 (1), 69-79. van Riper, C.J., Landon, A., Kidd, S., Bitterman, P., Fitzgerald, L.A., Granek, E.F., Ibarra, S., Iwaniec, D., Raymond, C.M., & Toledo, D. (2017). Incorporating socio-cultural phenomena into ecosystem service valuation: The importance of critical pluralism. BioScience, 67(3), 233-244. van Riper C.J., Kyle, G.T., Sherrouse, B.C., Sutton, S.G., & Bagstad, K.J. (2017). Toward an integrated understanding of social values for ecosystem services and environmental conditions in a national park. Ecological Indicators, 72, 278-287. van Riper C.J., & Kyle, G.T. (2014). Understanding the internal processes of behavioral engagement in a national park: A latent variable path analysis of the value-belief-norm theory. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 38, 288-297. van Riper, C.J., Kyle, G.T., Sutton, S.G., Barnes, M., & Sherrouse, B.C. (2012). Mapping social values for ecosystem services at Hinchinbrook Island National Park, Australia. Applied Geography, 35, 164-173. van Riper, C.J., Thiel, A., Penker, M., Braito, M., Landon, A.C., Thomsen, J., & Tucker, C.M. (2018). Incorporating multi-level values into the social-ecological systems framework. Ecology and Society, 23(3), 25. 
 Michelle M Wander Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Michelle M Wander Professor N-225 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 333-9471 mwander@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Sustainable Agriculture and Agroecology Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Wander works with farmers, educators, and policymakers to quantify the benefits of diversified and organic production, precision conservation and woody perennial polycultures, and determine how standards, voluntary marketing, and decision support tools can encourage soil stewardship. Biography I am interested in agroecology and agricultural sustainability.This is why I study the influence of management (tillage and cover crops, perennials, organic farming systems; crop rotation and fertilization) on soils, organic matter and system performance with emphasis on nutrient cycling, plant-soil relations, roots and physical protection of organic matter, soil conservation and alternative methods for soil testing.My work includes: the valuation of standards and metrics for ecosystem services and agricultural sustainability as well as work in urban and rural settings to advance nutrient testing, budgeting, life cycle analysis, conservation assessment tools used by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. Areas of Expertise Soil Quality Carbon Sequestration Organic Matter Management Agronomy/Agroecology Soil Science and Conservation Sustainable Agriculture Organic Agriculture Sustainability Metrics Agricultural Life Cycle Landscape and Ecosystem Ecology Resident Instruction NRES 594 - NRES Professional Orientation NRES 586 - Soil Organic Matter: a lecture course for graduate students NRES 499 - Scholarship of Sustainability NRES 438 - Soil Nutrient Cycling: a laboratory/discussion course Professional Societies Soil Science Society of America Committee for Sustainable and Organic Agriculture Ecological Society of America Soil Ecological Society 
 Michael Patrick Ward Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Michael Patrick Ward Associate Professor N-415 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-4089 mpward@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Applied Animal Ecology and Conservation Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Ward focuses on species of conservation concern and has developed novel approaches to species conservation. He uses telemetry to radio monitor the behavior and migration of birds. He works with a broad spectrum of people from farmers in central Illinois to the U.S. Army to the Cuban and Mexican governments. Biography I study the ecology and behavior of birds often with the overarching goal of conservation. For more information Ward Lab Resident Instruction NRES 348 Fish and Wildlife Ecology NRES 101 - Wildlife Conservation in the 21st Century 
 Yannarell Lab at the University of Illinois Microbial Ecology Home Research People Research Overview In my lab we study microbial community ecology, with an emphasis on interactions between plants, microorganisms, and the soil ecosystem. These interactions can have dramatic consequences for plant health, fitness, and community dynamics, and they can determine how changes in plant community structure can lead to further soil-mediated changes in succession and ecosystem processes.We work in a variety of natural, restored, and managed ecosystems, and our research synthesizes aspects of community ecology, phylogeny, evolution, invasion biology, agroecology, and ecosystem function. We use a combination of field work and experimentation, molecular biology tools, functional assays, and multivariate statistical methods and modeling. Typical questions that we ask include: How do changes in plant community composition (such as plant invasion and shrub encroachment) affect the structure and function of soil microbial communities? Do these changes have broader consequences for ecosystem function in invaded communities? Do particular microbial interactions facilitate invasions, and can we apply our knowledge of microbial interactions to help manage or eradicate plant invasions? How can microbial interactions be used to improve agricultural production and sustainability? What impacts do cover crops and tillage practices have on soil microbial community composition and function, and can these practices be fine-tuned to lead to better economic and environmental impacts of agriculture? What microorganisms participate in plant-soil feedback? How does negative plant soil feedback emerge, and what are the ecological and evolutionary forces that drive plant-soil feedback? How are these interactions structured in space and time and by the environment? How do root-mediated and litter-mediated mechanisms of plant-microbe interaction differ for the ecology of plant and microbial communities? How do soil microorganisms interact with seeds, litter, phytochemicals, allelochemicals, and antimicrobial compounds, and how does chemical ecology shape the interactions between plants, microbes, and the soil ecosystem? 2020 Yannarell Lab at the University of Illinois Responsive Theme powered by WordPress 
 Zhongjie Yu Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences Zhongjie Yu Assistant Professor S218 Turner Hall 1102 S. Goodwin Urbana Illinois 61801 (217) 244-8009 zjyu@illinois.edu Primary Research Area Soil Science & Conservation Profile Sections Overview Academics Research Publications Honors Mission Statement Dr. Yu's research seeks to gain a mechanistic understanding of the biogeochemical nitrogen cycle by investigating how biological, ecological, and hydrological drivers of the nitrogen cycle are recorded and reflected in their natural abundances stable isotope composition and how these isotopic imprints can be effectively used to infer and model the source, transport, and transformation of reactive nitrogen in the environment. Education Ph.D. in Biogeochemistry, August 2018, University of Pittsburgh M.S. in Environmental Geophysics, July 2013, Rutgers University M.S. in Environmental Geochemistry, July 2011, East China Normal University. B.S. in Geographical Sciences (with honor), July 2008, East China Normal University. Documents Curriculum Vitae Research Interests Using statistical and mechanistic models to examine the climatic, hydrological, and biophysical drivers of nitrogen cycling in soil and freshwater systems. Using stable isotope analysis (e.g., 15 N/ 14 N and 18 O/ 17 O/ 16 O) to quantify the microbial transformations of reactive nitrogen in soil and freshwater systems. Nitrogen biogeochemistry in terrestrial, agricultural, and aquatic ecosystems. 
